`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` Chapter (#289)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/data_vis_aog.md

# Data Visualization with AlgebraOfGraphics.jl {#sec:aog}

> **_NOTE:_**
> Don't forget to check [`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` documentation](https://aog.makie.org).

`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` is a higher-level plotting package that uses `Makie.jl` under the hood.
It is geared towards data visualization workflows with support for `DataFrame`s.
`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` abstracts away some common patterns in data visualization using an interface that was based on the "grammar of graphics" approach that is used by R's `ggplot2` package.

> The **grammar of graphics** is a framework that follows a layered approach to construct visualizations in a structure manner.

Reviewer: I don't agree with the wording **grammar**, it's too R. Here it is **Algebra**. Also, I think that it would be fitting to have a mention to https://aog.makie.org/stable/philosophy/

Author: Please check if [6df1648](https://github.com/JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience/pull/289/commits/6df164833c7e4554560c06bdb4988e77f96c9aa4) solves this.

There are four main types of layers:

- **data** layer
- **mapping** layer
- **visual transformation** layer
- **statistical transformation** layer

`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` allows you to construct all of these types of layers with functions that returns a `Layer` object,
in which all of the information necessary will be encoded.
You can then perform **two operations on layers**:

- **multiplication with `*`**: this fuses two or more layers into a _single_ layer
- **addition with `+`**: this superimposes two or more layers into a vector of `Layer`s

> Finally, as the name suggests, `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` is more than a grammar but also an algebra for `Layer` objects.

Reviewer: Maybe at the same level where Grammar if mentioned it. So that is less sparse and creates confusion.

Author: Please check if [6df1648](https://github.com/JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience/pull/289/commits/6df164833c7e4554560c06bdb4988e77f96c9aa4) solves this.

And, as such, it defines two algebraic properties.
Let `a`, `b` and `c` be `Layer` objects:

- **associative property**: `(a * b) * c = a * (b * c)`
- **distributive property**: `a  * (b + c) = (a * b) + (a + b)`

To get started with `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl`,
you'll need to load it along with a desired `Makie.jl` backend (Chapter -@sec:DataVisualizationMakie):

```julia
using AlgebraOfGraphics
using CairoMakie
```

## Layers {#sec:aog_layers}

The first layer we'll cover will be the **data layer**.
You can create data layers with the `data` function:

```jl
sco("""
data_layer = data(grades_2020())
""")
```

> As you can see, `data` takes any `DataFrame` and returns a `Layer` type.

Reviewer: maybe is worth mentioning that not only DataFrames are acceptable. Have you seen the latest examples here, https://beautiful.makie.org/dev/examples/generated/2d/aog/scatterlinesAoG/, maybe something is worth transferring here.

Author: Please check if [6df1648](https://github.com/JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience/pull/289/commits/6df164833c7e4554560c06bdb4988e77f96c9aa4) solves this.

# Data Visualization with AlgebraOfGraphics.jl {#sec:aog}

`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` is a higher-level plotting package that uses `Makie.jl` under the hood.
It is geared towards data visualization workflows with support for `DataFrame`s.

> `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` abstracts away some common patterns in data visualization using an interface inspired by R's `ggplot2` package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` abstracts away some common patterns in data visualization using an interface similar to R's `ggplot2` package.
```

`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` follows a layered approach to construct visualizations in a structured manner.
There are four main types of layers:

- **data** layer
- **mapping** layer
- **visual transformation** layer
- **statistical transformation** layer

> **_NOTE:_**
> `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` has some guiding principles described in their [philosophy section](https://aog.makie.org/stable/philosophy/).

> `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` allows you to construct all of these types of layers with functions that returns a `Layer` object,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` allows you to construct all of these types of layers with functions that return a `Layer` object,
```

in which all of the information necessary will be encoded.
You can then perform **two operations on layers**:

- **multiplication with `*`**: this fuses two or more layers into a _single_ layer
- **addition with `+`**: this superimposes two or more layers into a vector of `Layer`s

Finally, as the name suggests, `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` is an algebra for `Layer` objects.
And, as such, it defines two algebraic properties.
Let `a`, `b` and `c` be `Layer` objects, then the following two properties hold:

- **associative property**: `(a * b) * c = a * (b * c)`
- **distributive property**: `a  * (b + c) = (a * b) + (a + b)`

To get started with `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl`,
you'll need to load it along with a desired `Makie.jl` backend (Chapter -@sec:DataVisualizationMakie):

```julia
using AlgebraOfGraphics
using CairoMakie
```

## Layers {#sec:aog_layers}

We'll cover the **data layer** first.

> You can create data layers with the `data` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which can be created with the `data` function:
```

Author: Can we start sentences with `Which`?

Reviewer: maybe not the best source. https://www.quickanddirtytips.com/articles/can-you-start-a-sentence-with-which/, but your sentence is also ok. My issue with it is that `data layers` is twice too close.

```jl
sco("""
data_layer = data(grades_2020())
""")
```

As you can see, `data` takes any `DataFrame` and returns a `Layer` type.
You can see that we do not have any any mapping, visual, or statistical transformations information.

> That will need to be specified in different layer types with different functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That will need to be specified in different layer type with different functions.
```

> **_NOTE:_**
> `data` layers can use any [`Tables.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaData/Tables.jl/blob/main/INTEGRATIONS.md) data format,

> > which `DataFrame` and `NamedTuples` are included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> including `DataFrames` and `NamedTuples`.
```

> Let's see how to encode mapping information in a **mapping layer** with the `mapping` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see how to encode data information in a **mapping layer** with the `mapping` function.
```

> This functions has the following signature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function has the following signature:
```

```julia
mapping(
    x, y, z;
    color,
    size,
    ...
)
```

> The positional arguments `x`, `y`, and `z` correspond to the X-, Y- and Z-axis mappings where the keyword arguments `color`, `size`, and so on, correspond to the aesthetics mappings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The positional arguments `x`, `y`, and `z` correspond to the X-, Y- and Z-axis mappings and the keyword arguments `color`, `size`, and so on, correspond to the aesthetics mappings.
```

The purpose of `mapping` is to encode in a `Layer` information about which columns of the underlying data `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` will map onto the axis and other visualization aesthetics, e.g. color and size.
Let's use `mapping` to encode information regarding X- and Y-axis:

```jl
sco("""
mapping_layer = mapping(:name, :grade_2020)
""")
```

We pass the columns as `Symbol`s in a similar manner as we did for `DataFrames.jl` (Chapter -@sec:dataframes) and `DataFramesMeta.jl` (Chapter -@sec:dataframesmeta).
In the output, we see that we have successfully encoded both `:name` and `:grade_2020` columns as the X- and Y-axis, respectively.

Finally, we can use a **visual transformation layer** to encode which type of plot we want to make.
This is done with the `visual` function which takes a **`Makie.jl` plotting type** as a single positional argument.
All of the mappings specified in the mapping layer will be passed to the plotting type.

```jl
sco("""
visual_layer = visual(BarPlot)
""")
```

> The `visual_layer` is a visual transformation layer that only encodes information about which type of visual transformation you want to apply to your visualization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `visual_layer` is a visual transformation layer that encodes information about which type of visual transformation you want to use in your visualization plus keyword arguments that might apply to the selected plotting type.
```

> **_NOTE:_**
> We are using the plotting _type_ (`BarPlot`) instead of the plotting _function_ (`barplot`).
> This is due how `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` works.
> You can see all of the available mappings for all of the plotting types by inspecting their functions either using Julia's help REPL, e.g. `?barplot`, or [`Makie.jl`'s documentation on plotting functions](https://docs.makie.org/stable/examples/plotting_functions/).

### Drawing Layers {#sec:aog_layers_draw}

Once we have all of the necessary layers we can fuse them together with `*` and pass to the `draw` function.

> The **`draw` function** will use all of the information from the layer it is being supplied and will send it as **plottings instructions to the activated `Makie.jl` backend**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **`draw` function** will use all of the information from the layer it is being supplied and will send it as **plotting instructions to the activated `Makie.jl` backend**:
```

`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` will automatically pass the underlying columns of the mapping layer from the data layer's `DataFrame` as the X- and Y-labels.

Note that you can just perform the `*` operations inside `draw` if you don't want to create intermediate variables:

```jl
s = """
    # aog_basic_verbose # hide
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    plt = data(grades_2020()) * mapping(:name, :grade_2020) * visual(BarPlot)
    f = draw(plt) # hide
    draw(plt)
    label = "aog_basic_verbose" # hide
    caption = "AlgebraOfGraphics bar plot." # hide
    link_attributes = "width=60%" # hide
    Options(f.figure; filename=label, caption, label, link_attributes) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

### Mapping Layer Keyword Arguments {#sec:aog_layers_keyword}

Let's try to use other mappings such as the keyword arguments `color` and `dodge` in our bar plot,
since they are supported by the `BarPlot` plotting type.
First, let's revisit our example `all_grades()` data defined in Chapter -@sec:dataframes and add a `:year` column:

```jl
sco("""
# aog grades # hide
df = @transform all_grades() :year = ["2020", "2020", "2020", "2020", "2021", "2021", "2021"]
"""; process=without_caption_label
)
```

> Now we can pass the `:year` column to be mapped as a both `color` and `dodge` aesthetics inside `mapping`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can pass the `:year` column to be mapped as both a `color` and  `dodge` aesthetic inside `mapping`:
```

            :grade => "Grade";
            color=:year => "Year",
            dodge=:year) *
        visual(BarPlot)
    f = draw(plt) # hide
    draw(plt)
    label = "aog_color_custom" # hide
    caption = "AlgebraOfGraphics bar plot with colors as year and custom labels." # hide
    link_attributes = "width=60%" # hide
    Options(f.figure; filename=label, caption, label, link_attributes) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

Let's make use of the `transformation` in `source => transformation => target` to transform our grades scale from 0-10 to 0-100 and also our names to uppercase:

```jl
s = """
    # aog_color_custom2 # hide
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    plt = data(df) *
        mapping(
            :name => uppercase => "Name",
            :grade => (x -> x*10) => "Grade";
            color=:year => "Year",
            dodge=:year) *
        visual(BarPlot)
    f = draw(plt) # hide
    draw(plt)
    label = "aog_color_custom2" # hide
    caption = "AlgebraOfGraphics bar plot with colors as year, custom labels and transformations." # hide
    link_attributes = "width=60%" # hide
    Options(f.figure; filename=label, caption, label, link_attributes) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

> As you can see, we can pass both regular functinos or anonymous functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, we can pass both regular or anonymous functions.
```

# Data Visualization with AlgebraOfGraphics.jl {#sec:aog}

> **_NOTE:_**

> > Don't forget to check [`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` documentation](https://aog.makie.org).

Reviewer 2: This is a bit unclear. Our books is a more structured introduction to AoG, right? So why point people to the docs already at the start of our chapter?

Author: Maybe we should move this to the end of the chapter?

Reviewer 2: Yes good idea

`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` is a higher-level plotting package that uses `Makie.jl` under the hood.
It is geared towards data visualization workflows with support for `DataFrame`s.

> `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` abstracts away some common patterns in data visualization using an interface inspited by R's `ggplot2` package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` abstracts away some common patterns in data visualization using an interface inspired by R's `ggplot2` package.
```

> `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` follows a layered approach to construct visualizations in a structure manner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` follows a layered approach to construct visualizations in a structured manner.
```

There are four main types of layers:

- **data** layer
- **mapping** layer
- **visual transformation** layer
- **statistical transformation** layer

> **_NOTE:_**

> > `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` has some guiding principles described in their [documentation philosophy section](https://aog.makie.org/stable/philosophy/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` has some guiding principles described in their [philosophy section](https://aog.makie.org/stable/philosophy/).
```

`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` allows you to construct all of these types of layers with functions that returns a `Layer` object,
in which all of the information necessary will be encoded.
You can then perform **two operations on layers**:

- **multiplication with `*`**: this fuses two or more layers into a _single_ layer
- **addition with `+`**: this superimposes two or more layers into a vector of `Layer`s

Finally, as the name suggests, `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` is an algebra for `Layer` objects.
And, as such, it defines two algebraic properties.

> Let `a`, `b` and `c` be `Layer` objects:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let `a`, `b` and `c` be `Layer` objects, then the following two properties hold:
```

- **associative property**: `(a * b) * c = a * (b * c)`
- **distributive property**: `a  * (b + c) = (a * b) + (a + b)`

To get started with `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl`,
you'll need to load it along with a desired `Makie.jl` backend (Chapter -@sec:DataVisualizationMakie):

```julia
using AlgebraOfGraphics
using CairoMakie
```

## Layers {#sec:aog_layers}

> The first layer we'll cover will be the **data layer**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll cover the **data layer** first.
```

You can create data layers with the `data` function:

```jl
sco("""
data_layer = data(grades_2020())
""")
```

As you can see, `data` takes any `DataFrame` and returns a `Layer` type.
You can see that we do not have any any mapping, visual, or statistical transformations information.
That will need to be specified in different layer types with different functions.

> **_NOTE:_**
> `data` layers can use any [`Tables.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaData/Tables.jl/blob/main/INTEGRATIONS.md) data format,
> which `DataFrame` and `NamedTuples` are included.

> Let's see how to encode mapping information oin a **mapping layer** with the `mapping` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's see how to encode mapping information in a **mapping layer** with the `mapping` function.
```

This functions has the following signature:

```julia
mapping(
    x, y, z;
    color,
    size,
    ...
)
```

> The positional arguments `x`, `y`, and `z` correspond to the X-, Y- and Z-axis mappings.
> Where the keyword arguments `color`, `size`, and so on, correspond to the aesthetics mappings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The positional arguments `x`, `y`, and `z` correspond to the X-, Y- and Z-axis mappings where the keyword arguments `color`, `size`, and so on, correspond to the aesthetics mappings.
```

The purpose of `mapping` is to encode in a `Layer` information about which columns of the underlying data `AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` will map onto the axis and other visualization aesthetics, e.g. color and size.
Let's use `mapping` to encode information regarding X- and Y-axis:

```jl
sco("""
mapping_layer = mapping(:name, :grade_2020)
""")
```

We pass the columns as `Symbol`s in a similar manner as we did for `DataFrames.jl` (Chapter -@sec:dataframes) and `DataFramesMeta.jl` (Chapter -@sec:dataframesmeta).

> In the ouput, we see that we have sucessfully encoded both `:name` and `:grade_2020` columns as the X- and Y-axis, respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the output, we see that we have successfully encoded both `:name` and `:grade_2020` columns as the X- and Y-axis, respectively.
```

"""; process=without_caption_label
)
```

Now we can pass the `:year` column to be mapped as a both `color` and `dodge` aesthetics inside `mapping`:

```jl
s = """
    # aog_color # hide
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    plt = data(df) *
        mapping(
            :name,
            :grade;
            color=:year,
            dodge=:year) *
        visual(BarPlot)
    f = draw(plt) # hide
    draw(plt)
    label = "aog_color" # hide
    caption = "AlgebraOfGraphics bar plot with colors as year." # hide
    link_attributes = "width=60%" # hide
    Options(f.figure; filename=label, caption, label, link_attributes) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

`AlgebraOfGraphics.jl` creates for us a legend with the underlying information from the `color` mapping column inside the data layer's `DataFrame`.

### Transformations Inside Mapping Layers {#sec:aog_layers_transformations}

We can also perform **transformations** inside the `mapping` function.
It supports the `DataFrames.jl`'s minilanguage `source => transformation => target`.
Where `source` is the original column name and `target` is a `String` representing the new desired label.

> If we simply use `source => target`, the underlying transformation will be the `identity` function, i.e. no transformation is performed and the data is passed as it is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we simply use `source => target`, the underlying transformation will be the `identity` function, i.e., no transformation is performed and the data is passed as it is.
```
